DOCS-9479-db-querysingle-editorial-kt (#1149)
mulesoft/docs-connectors: db/1.9/modules/ROOT/edits/database-connector-query-single.adoc

== Query a Single Record from a Database Example - Mule 4

> The *Query single* operation enables you to execute an SQL query that returns a single record (row) from a database and access the result payload without any additional transformations. This operation does not stream any of the returned fields. When the query is executed, all the values of the returned row are read into memory and returned in the payload. You must be careful, because if your row is too large, you could run out of memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *Query single* operation enables you to execute an SQL query that returns a single record (row) from a database and access the result payload without any additional transformations. This operation does not stream any of the returned fields. When the query is executed, all the values of the returned row are read into memory and returned in the payload. You must be careful, however, because if your row is too large, you could run out of memory.
```

Reviewer: I wonder if we should start a new paragraph after "payload" and include both recommendations: to ensure that rows are not too long (to avoid memory loss) and to use pooling (to avoid insufficient connections).

Also, if you use connection pooling you do not have to worry about your application running out of connections, because this operation returns the connection to the pool immediately after the query is executed.

> You invoke the *Query single* operation in the same way as you invoke the *Select* operation, although you always get a single result, regardless of the number of records returned by the actual SQL query.

Reviewer: Is this clearer?
```suggestion
Although you invoke the *Query single* operation in the same way as you invoke the *Select* operation, you always get a single result, regardless of the number of records returned by the actual SQL query.
```

The following example shows how to configure the Anypoint Connector for Database (Database Connector) *Query single* operation in a Mule application that retrieves books information from a table in a MySQL database. +

To accomplish this example, you must: +

> 

Reviewer: Should the following be a numbered list (chrono order)?

> * Run an SQL statement that creates a table called `BOOK` and inserts seven records of book information (title, author, bookshopName, isbn, price).

Reviewer: This refers to seven records but names only five?

> * Configure the SQL database connection.

Reviewer: Specify MySQL?

* Create the Mule application.

> * Run, and test the application with curl commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Run the application and then test it by using with curl commands.
```

Reviewer: Also, note that this list item and the one previous are combined in the subtopic that comes later....

The following screenshot shows the Anypoint Studio app flow for this example:

.Query a Single Record from a Database flow
image::database-query-single-flow.png[Query a Single Record from a Database flow]

== Create the Table in the Database

> Before configuring the SQL database connection and creating the Mule app, run the following SQL statement to create a table called `BOOK` and inserts seven book records. An incremental `id` is associated to each new book added into the table. For example, the first book added into the table has an `id` equal to `1`, the second book will have an `id` equal to `2`, and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before configuring the SQL database connection and creating the Mule app, run the following SQL statement to create a table called `BOOK` and insert seven book records. An incremental `id` is associated with each new book added to the table. For example, the first book added to the table has an `id` equal to `1`, the second book has an `id` equal to `2`, and so on.
```

INSERT INTO BOOK(title, author, bookshopName, isbn, price) VALUES('IT', 'Stephen King', 'A.Z. Fell and Co.', '9781508297123', 20);
INSERT INTO BOOK(title, author, bookshopName, isbn, price) VALUES('The Nice and Accurate Prophecies of Agnes Nutter', 'Agnes Nutter', 'A.Z. Fell and Co.', '000000000000', 200);
INSERT INTO BOOK(title, author, bookshopName, isbn, price) VALUES('Cujo', 'Stephen King', 'A.Z. Fell and Co.', '9781501192241', 20);
INSERT INTO BOOK(title, author, bookshopName, isbn, price) VALUES('Nation', 'Terry Pratchett', 'A.Z. Fell and Co.', '9780552557795', 30);
INSERT INTO BOOK(title, author, bookshopName, isbn, price) VALUES('The Ocean at the End of the Lane', 'Neil Gaiman', 'A.Z. Fell and Co.', '9780062459367', 30);
----

== Configure a MySQL Database Connection

After you create the table, go to Anypoint Studio to configure the MySQL database connection:

. Create a new Mule project in Studio.
. Navigate to the *Global Elements* view.
. Click *Create* to open the *Choose Global Type* view.
. In the *Filter* field, type `http`, select *HTTP Listener config*, and click *OK*. +

> This configuration is for the HTTP *Listener* source that initiates the Mule application flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
These actions configure the HTTP *Listener* source that initiates the Mule application flow.
```

Reviewer: GLOBALLY insert the + linespace between list item and description in all list items that are followed by additional text.

. In the *Connection* field, select *MySQL Connection*.
. Click *Configure* to add the required MySQL JDBC driver and select one of: +
+
* *Add recommended library* +
Install the recommended library.
* *Use local file* +
Install the library using a local file.
* *Add Maven dependency* +
Install a Maven dependency to add to the project.
+
[start=10]
. In the *Connection* section, complete the following fields: +
+
* *Host* +
`localhost`
* *Port* +
`3306`
* *User* +
`root`
* *Password* +
`mysql`
* *Database* +
`sys`
+
[start=11]
. On the *Advanced* tab, set the *Pooling profile* field to *Edit inline*.
. Set the *Max pool size* field to `5`.
. Click *Test Connection* to confirm that Mule can connect to the database.
. Click *OK*.

The following screenshot shows the *HTTP Listener* global element configuration in Studio:

.HTTP Listener configuration
image::database-querysingle-example-1.png[HTTP Listener configuration]

The following screenshots show the Database global element configuration in Studio:

.Database Config General cofiguration
image::database-querysingle-example-2.png[Database Config General configuration setting Host, Port, User, Password Database values parameters]

> == Create, Run and Test the Mule Application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Create, Run, and Test the Mule Application
```

Reviewer: Note that this topic was listed as two in the intro: first create, then run and test.

Reviewer: Oh dear...and this topic adds "configure" as well.
Please standardize the action list with the subtopics create, configure, run, and test.
Maybe each should be its own Level 2 topic?

> After you configure the MySQL database connection, create, run, and test the Mule app:

Reviewer: If this intro is "create, run, and test," why is it followed by "configure the HTTP..." title and then "create" as first sentence following?
Again, clarify create, configure, run, and test actions, order, language.

=== Configure the HTTP Listener and Set Variable Component

To create the Mule flow:

> . In the *Mule Palette* view, select the HTTP *Listener* source and drag it on to the canvas. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the *Mule Palette* view, select the HTTP *Listener* source and drag it onto the canvas. +
```

> The source initiates the flow by listening for incoming HTTP message attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
The source initiates the flow by listening for incoming HTTP message attributes.
```

. In the *Connector configuration* field, select the `HTTP_Listener_config` global configuration.
. Set the *Path* field to `/select/book/{maxId}`. +

> The `maxId` value parameter indicates how many books records to retrieve from the database. You can increment this value regardless of the number of maximum connections you configured in your database connection pool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
The `maxId` value parameter indicates how many records to retrieve from the database. You can increment this value without being limited by the maximum connections you configured in your database connection pool.
```

. In the *Mime Type* tab, set the *Mime Type* field to `application/json`.
. In the *Advanced* tab, set the *Allowed methods* field to `GET`.
. Drag a *Set Variable* component to the right of the *Listener* source. +

> This component creates a new variable to save the database results that will be obtained from the *Query single* operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
This component creates a new variable to save the database results obtained from the *Query single* operation.
```

> . Set the *Name* field to `bookCollection` and the *Value* field to `#[[]]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Set the *Name* field to `bookCollection` and the *Value* field to `#[[]]`:
```

.Set Variable configuration
image::database-querysingle-example-3.png[Set Variable configuration]

> === Configure the For Each Component, the Query Single Operation, and Set Payload Component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Configure the For Each Component, the Query Single Operation, and the Set Payload Component
```

> Continue creating the Mule application using a *For Each* component to iterate over the number of books requested by *HTTP Listener*. Then retrieve the book information using the *Query single* operation, and save the results in a payload variable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Continue creating the Mule application using a *For Each* component to iterate the number of books requested by *HTTP Listener*. Then retrieve the book information using the *Query single* operation, and save the results in a payload variable:
```

. Drag a *For Each* component to the right of *Set Variable*. +
. Set the *Collection* field to `#[1 to attributes.uriParams.maxId as Number]`. +

> This expression iterates the collection of books in the table, from the first book (`1`) to the number of books set in the `maxId` parameter, when performing the HTTP request `/select/book/{maxId}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
This expression iterates the collection of books in the table, from the first book (`1`) to the number of books set in the `maxId` parameter, when performing the HTTP request `/select/book/{maxId}`.
```

+
.For Each configuration
image::database-querysingle-example-4.png[For Each configuration]
+
[start=3]

> . Drag the *Query single* operation inside the *For Each* component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Drag the *Query single* operation into the *For Each* component.
```

. Set the *Connector configuration* field to `Database_Config` to connect to the MySQL database configuration.
. Set the *SQL Query Text* field to `SELECT id, title, author FROM BOOK WHERE id = :id`. +

> This query selects the books information from the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
This query selects the books information from the database.
```

. Set the *Input Parameters* field to `![CDATA[#[{'id': payload }]]]`. +

> This expression maps the key parameter `id` (referenced in the previous *SQL Query Text* expression) to `payload` which is the result value of books information retrieved using the `SELECT` query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
This expression maps the key parameter `id` (referenced in the previous *SQL Query Text* expression) to `payload`, which is the result retrieved using the `SELECT` query.
```

+
.Query single configuration
image::database-querysingle-example-5.png[Query single configuration]
+
[start=7]
. Drag another *Set Variable* component to the right of the *Query single* operation.
. Set the *Name* field to `bookCollection` and the *Value* field to `#[vars.bookCollection ++ [payload]]`. +

> The original variable `bookCollection` now saves the `payload` of the retrieved book information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+
The original variable `bookCollection` now saves the `payload` of the retrieved book information.
```

. Drag a *Set Payload* component to the right of the *For Each* component.

> . Set the *Value* field to `#[vars.bookCollection]` to save the variable content as a new output payload.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Set the *Value* field to `#[vars.bookCollection]` to save the variable content as a new output payload:
```

.Set Payload configuration
image::database-querysingle-example-6.png[Set Payload configuration]

> === Run and Test the Mule Application

Reviewer: run and test
vs.
complete and test in the first sentence
vs.
save and test in the task steps

To complete and test the Mule application:

. Save the project in Studio.

> . Test the app by using the following curl command in your terminal: `curl localhost:8081/select/book/7`. +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Test the app by running `curl localhost:8081/select/book/7` at the command line. +
```
